# Qleverfile settings

The `Qleverfile` contains the full configuration for the `qlever` command, see
[Quickstart](quickstart/). The variables in the `Qleverfile` are written in
`UPPER_SNAKE_CASE` and are grouped into sections. The sections are
`[data]`, `[index]`, `[server]`, `[runtime]`, and `[ui]`. See
https://github.com/qlever-dev/qlever-control/tree/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles
for a wide selection of example Qleverfiles.

For each `Qleverfile` variable, there is a corresponding command-line option for
one or more of the `qlever` commands, which are written in `--snake-case`. For
example, the `Qleverfile` variable `ACCESS_TOKEN` corresponds to the
`--access-token` option of the commands `qlever start`, `qlever settings`,
`qlever clear-cache`, and `qlever query`.

The command-line option always takes precedence over the `Qleverfile` variable,
in case both are specified. There are some command-line options that are
specific to a command and do not have a corresponding `Qleverfile` variable.
For example, the option `--kill-existing-with-same-port` of `qlever start`,
which does what the name suggests.

The following sections describe all `Qleverfile` variables and their
corresponding command-line options, with their respective default values. The
options specific to a particular command are not listed here, you get them
via `qlever <command> --help`.

If a variable is missing from the documentation below, please open an issue on
https://qlever.dev/qlever.docs/issues. In the meantime, you can always resort
to `qlever <command> --help`. If the variable / option exist, it will be
listed there.

## Section `[data]`

`NAME`, `--name`: The base name of all files created by various `qlever`
commands. We strongly recommend to stick to the convention to have one separate
directory for each dataset (with a `Qleverfile` in it). The name of the
directory is up to you. Default: none.

`GET_DATA_CMD`, `--get-data-cmd`: The command invoked by `qlever get-data` to
obtain the dataset. This can be anything that works on your system; see the
many [example Qleverfiles](https://github.com/qlever-dev/qlever-control/tree/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles)
Default: none.

`DESCRIPTION`, `--description`: A concise description of the dataset, set by
`qlever index`. Default: none.

`TEXT_DESCRIPTION`, `--text-description`: A concise description of the
additional text data if any, set by `qlever index`. Default: none.

`FORMAT`, `--format`: The format of the data, one of `ttl`, `nt`, or `nq`. Default:
`ttl`.

## Section `[index]`

`INPUT_FILES`, `--input-files`: A list of input files or patterns, separated by
spaces (you can use `*` and `?` as wildcards). This is used in two ways. First,
`qlever index` checks whether these files exist, and if not, reports an error.
Second, it is often useful (but not mandatory) to use this variable in your
definition of `CAT_INPUT_FILES` or `MULTI_JSON_INPUT`, see the many
[example Qleverfiles](https://github.com/qlever-dev/qlever-control/tree/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles).
Default: none.

`CAT_INPUT_FILES`, `--cat-input-files`: The command used to create a single
input stream for `qlever index`. This can be any command that works on your
system, see the many [example Qleverfiles](https://github.com/qlever-dev/qlever-control/tree/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles).
In particular, you can use commands like `zcat` or `bzcat` or `xzcat`, in order
to read compressed files directly. Default: none.

`PARALLEL_PARSING`, `--parallel-parsing`: Whether to parse the single input
stream in parallel (`true`) or sequentially (`false`). Parallel parsing is much
faster, but requires that all prefix declarations are at the beginning of the
input stream. Default: `true` if you use `CAT_INPUT_FILES`, but deprecated to
encourage setting it explicitly or using `MULTI_INPUT_JSON` instead.

`MULTI_INPUT_JSON`, `--multi-input-json`: A comma-separated list of JSON
objects to define multiple input streams for `qlever index`. Each JSON object
must specify a `"cmd"` (the command that produces the input stream) and a
`"format"` (one of `ttl`, `nt`, or `nq`), can can optionally specify a
`"graph"` (the name of the graph to which the triples from this input stream
are added, use `-` for the default graph), and `"parallel"` (`"true"` if this
input stream should be parsed in parallel, which is faster but requires that
all prefix declarations are at the beginning of the input stream, or `"false"`
if not). Additionally, each JSON object can specify `"for-each"` (a
space-separated list of files or patterns), with the effect that the command
from `"cmd"` is run once for each file matching one of the patterns, with `{}`
in the command replaced by the file name. In particular, this is useful if you
have many files that belong to the same graph and have the same format.
Default: none.

`SETTINGS_JSON`, `--settings-json`: A JSON object (as a string) that can be
used to pass additional settings for `qlever index`. This exists for historical
reasons and will be deprecated soon. In the meantime, the only relevant key is
`"num-triples-per-batch"`, which controls how many triples are parsed in one
batch. All data from a batch is kept in memory until it has been fully
processed, and when parsing input streams in parallel, multiple batches are
kept in memory at the same time. Thus, choosing a large value for this setting
can lead to high memory consumption or an out-of-memory crash. On the other
hand, two files per batch are produced during `qlever index`, which might
require increasing your `ULIMIT` (see next variable). The default value for
`"num-triples-per-batch"` is `10000000` (ten million).

`ULIMIT`, `--ulimit`: The maximum number of open files allowed during `qlever
index`. If this number is too low, `qlever index` will fail with an error that
will make it clear that you need to increase this value. Default: depends on
your system, but is often as low as `1024` (which is too low for large
datasets).

`STXXL_MEMORY`, `--stxxl-memory`: The amount of memory that can be used by
`qlever index`, specified with standard suffixes like `k`, `M`, `G`, and `T`.
This is only an approximate upper bound, the actual memory consumption might be
higher. When too low, `qlever index` might fail with an error message (which usually
makes it clear that you need to increase this value). The strange name of the
variable / option is an artifact from when QLever used the [STXXL
library](http://stxxl.org/) for external memory sorting, which it
no longer does. Defaut: `1G`.

`PARSER_BUFFER_SIZE`, `--parser-buffer-size`: The size of the buffer used by
`qlever index` when parsing an input stream, specified with standard suffixes
like `k`, `M`, `G`, and `T`. This must be large enough to hold the longest
predicate-object list in your dataset (everything from a subject until the next
`.`). Predicate-object lists are usually short, but can be long for `TTL`
datasets with many long literals, for example [Qleverfile.osm-planet](https://github.com/qlever-dev/qlever-control/tree/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles/Qleverfile.osm-planet). Default: `10M`.

`VOCABULARY_TYPE`, `--vocabulary-type`: Whether the vocabulary is stored
compressed or not (trade-off between index size and query speed), whether to
store it on disk or in memory (trade-off between memory consumption and query
speed), and whether to store geometry data in a separate file (always a good
idea if your dataset contains geometry data). The options are
`on-disk-compressed`, `in-memory-compressed`, `on-disk-uncompressed`,
`in-memory-uncompressed`, and `on-disk-compressed-geo-split`. Default:
`on-disk-compressed`.

`ENCODE_AS_IDS`, `--encode-as-ids`: List of IRI prefixes (separated by spaces)
with the effect that all IRIs starting with one of these prefixes and followed
by a sequence of at most 12 digits will not be stored as strings in the
vocabulary, but stored directly in one of QLever's internal 64-bit identifiers.
See
[Qleverfile.osm-planet](https://github.com/ad-freiburg/qlever-control/blob/main/src/qlever/Qleverfiles/Qleverfile.osm-planet) for an example. Default: none.

`TEXT_INDEX`, `--text-index`: Four options: `none` (no text index),
`from_literals` (create a text index from all literals in the dataset),
`from_text_records` (create a text index from the givens "words" and "docs"
file, see the next two variables / options), and
`from_literals_and_text_records` (create a text index from both literals and
the given "words" and "docs" file). Default: `none`.

`TEXT_WORDS_FILE`, `--text-words-file`: The name of the file containing the
word occurrences for the text index, one line per occurrence, in the format
`word or <IRI> TAB 0 or 1 TAB text record id TAB always 1`. Default:
`<NAME>.wordsfile.tsv`.

`TEXT_DOCS_FILE`, `--text-docs-file`: The name of the file containing the text
records for the text index, one line per record, in the format `text record id
TAB text`. Default: `<NAME>.docsfile.tsv`.

`INDEX_BINARY`, `--index-binary`: The binary for building the index, when
using `SYSTEM = native`. The binary must either be in your `PATH` or you must
specify the full path. Default: `IndexBuilderMain` (which is the default name
of the binary for index building when compiling QLever).

## Section `[server]`

`PORT`, `--port`: The port of the SPARQL endpoint created by `qlever start`.
Default: none.

`ACCESS_TOKEN`, `--access-token`: The access token required for privileged
operations such as `qlever clear-cache --complete`, `qlever query
--pin-to-cache`, and `qlever settings` (when modifying a setting). Default:
none (in which case no privileged operations are possible at all).

`MEMORY_FOR_QUERIES`, `--memory-for-queries`: The amount of memory that can be
used for queries, specified with standard suffixes like `k`, `M`, `G`, and `T`.
Default: `5G`.

`TIMEOUT`, `--timeout`: The maximum time a query is allowed to run, specified
with standard suffixes like `s`, `m`, and `h`. This is an approximate upper
bound, queries might run longer in some cases. Default: `30s`.
 
`CACHE_MAX_SIZE`, `--cache-max-size`: The maximum size of the cache used for
caching query results, specified with standard suffixes like `k`, `M`,
`G`, and `T`. When the total size of the cached results exceeds this value, the
eviction strategy is Least Recently Used (LRU). Default: `2G`.

`CACHE_MAX_SIZE_SINGLE_ENTRY`, `--cache-max-size-single-entry`: The maximum
size of a single cache entry, specified with standard suffixes like `k`, `M`,
`G`, and `T`. Default: `1G`.

`CACHE_MAX_NUM_ENTRIES`, `--cache-max-num-entries`: The maximum number of
cached results held in the cache at the same time. When the number of cached
results exceeds this value, the eviction strategy is Least Recently Used (LRU).
Default: `200`.

`PERSIST_UPDATES`, `--persist-updates`: When `true` (or the command-line
option `--persist-updates` is given), all update requests processed after
`qlever start` are persisted to disk, in a single file `<NAME>.update-triples`.
When the server is stopped and `qlever start` is run again, the updates are
replayed and new updates are appended to the same file. This is rudimentary
for now, and will be replaced by a more sophisticated mechanism soon. See also
`qlever update-wikidata`, where updates come from an SSE stream, and can be
replayed any time from an arbitrary point in time. Default: `false`.

## Section `[runtime]`

`SYSTEM`, `--system`: Three options: `native` (run natively, assuming that the
QLever binaries `ServerMain` and `IndexBuilderMain` are in your `PATH`),
`docker` (pull `Docker` image if none is present locally, and run in a
`Docker` container), and `podman` (same as `docker`, but using `Podman`
instead of `Docker`). Default: `docker`.

`IMAGE`, `--image`: The name of the image when using `SYSTEM = docker` or
`SYSTEM = podman`. Default: `docker.io/adfreiburg/qlever:latest`.

`INDEX_CONTAINER`, `--index-container`: The name of the container used by
`qlever index`, when using `SYSTEM = docker` or `SYSTEM = podman`.

`SERVER_CONTAINER`, `--server-container`: The name of the container used by
`qlever start`, when using `SYSTEM = docker` or `SYSTEM = podman`.

## Section `[ui]`

`UI_CONFIG`, `--ui-config`: The name of one of the preconfigurations from
https://qlever.dev (the parts after the https://qlever.dev/ is the name of the
preconfiguration). You cannot choose your own name here yet; this will be fixed
soon. But once you have picked a preconfiguration, you can modify it after
running `qlever ui` once, see the instructions printed by `qlever ui`. Default:
`default`.

`UI_PORT`, `--ui-port`: The port of the Qlever UI started with `qlever ui`.
Default: `8176` (the ASCII codes for `Q` and `L`).

`UI_SYSTEM`, `--ui-system`: Either `docker` or `podman`, which container
system to use for `qlever ui`. Note that unlike for `qlever index` and
`qlever start`, there is no `native` option (the only reason for a `native`
mode is that it is more efficient, but that is not a concern for the UI).
Default: `docker`.

`UI_IMAGE`, `--ui-image`: The name of the image used for `qlever ui`. Default:
`docker.io/adfreiburg/qlever-ui`.

`UI_CONTAINER`, `--ui-container`: The name of the container used for `qlever
ui`, when using `UI_SYSTEM = docker` or `UI_SYSTEM = podman`. Default:
`qlever.ui.<NAME>`.
